[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Ask yourself the following
question, how do I move?
All movement takes place in
the mind first, then the brain,
and then the body.
I am Randy Veitenheimer.
And my research and
experiences in the practice
of energetic medicine
over the last 40 years
has revealed a lot of
valuable information
on how we change
from a healthy state
to an unhealthy state of being.
My lifelong study of
yoga and martial arts
has produced some
insights that I
think you will find
helpful in discovering
your own methods of becoming
healthy and staying that way.
Yoga and martial arts both
use movement and the study
of movement to produce
not just physical fitness,
but also a healthy
state of mind.
In this episode, we'll explore
movement and your mind.
[INTRO MUSIC]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
An important understanding in
the practice of energy medicine
is that all problems
are energetic problems.
What is an energetic problem?
It is something that is
happening that you internally
support.
When this occurs, you do
not have enough energy
or information to create
or achieve a resolution.
So what happens is that parts
of your energetic field become
blocked or absent, which causes
a loss of form or function.
A loss of form would be physical
illness, and a loss of function
would be things that prevent you
from moving, like depression,
anxiety, guilt, shame.
So how do we create energy to
find or seek information that
would achieve a resolution?
In my work, I would
attribute this to movement.
Movement produces change.
Mentally, it is a change of
perspective or observation.
Physically, it produces
energy flow through the body.
This energy flow helps
create an awakening
in your present reality.
Energy movement can be
anything from qigong
to boxing, to
swimming, to running.
Any kind of movement increases
your breathing oxygen,
and also increases the amount
of energy available to the body.
The way to break
out of your patterns
is to find a way to move.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
There are two
aspects of reality--
zero reality and
number one reality.
Zero reality is
experiential reality.
And physical reality
is number one.
In number one reality, we
create physical movement.
And through that number
one reality movement,
we produce energy to
move into zero reality.
Zero reality is where we
create, and that is also
where we examine ourselves.
But if we don't have
the energy to do that,
we cannot perform this
changing function.
So when mental
movement happens, it
can have the reverse effect
which changes the physical body
as well.
Martial arts, yoga,
and other disciplines
aim to produce a more
energetic nature.
And a more energetic
nature allows
you to become healthier,
happier, and successful.
Of all the problems that
exists in life, all of them
can be addressed more
efficiently with more energy.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So let's get into the
physical body itself.
One of the things we
might look at first
is the expressions of
anxiety and depression.
As you go through
life, you have a lot
of ways to respond to the
circumstances and environments
you experience.
Anxiety and depression are
some of those expressions.
But what really goes on?
You have energy in your body.
You have energy
along your spine.
That energy flows up
and down the spine,
and it also energizes
different functions and forms
of the body.
There's an area
of the brain that
produces neurochemistry,
the outcome of which we
call anxiety.
And in the same
fashion, there's an area
of the brain that produces the
neurochemical expressions that
form depression.
So each of those is
activated by energy flow.
If you direct energy to those
portions of the brain that
produces neurochemistry,
then your experience
of what is going on
around you is the outcome
of anxiety or depression.
In modern medicine, when
you take anti-anxiety pills
or anti-depression
pills, what you're doing
is not stopping the energy flow.
You're not actually
stopping the production
of those neurochemical
expressions
that the body is creating.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So you have energy that flows
through your genetic templates
and produces a genetic
expression such as eye
color or hair color.
The loss of energy flowing
through those genes
results in gray hair or no hair.
This goes for all
cells and organs
in the body and the
entire human form.
The entire human form is
subjected to the adding
and subtracting of energy.
All human functions are
also energetically pliable.
Genes become an interesting
way to look at the human form.
You've got a million
different options.
So you have this
multiplicity of potential,
and it shows up in the
form you have today.
That form is an
execution of energy
flowing through those genes.
The energy flowing
through that gene
determines the extent
of its expression.
So if we look at male or
female, around 25 years old,
they start losing their hair.
And we say, well,
that's a genetic issue.
And it may be a genetic
issue, and the fact
that that genetic template
is either insufficient
or it has been modified, we
get into epigenetic changes,
to where the form doesn't hold.
And we say, well, that's
genes from my parents.
That is true, except that energy
flow through that template,
through that gene, can be
increased and can be changed.
I have seen this in
my practice, where
it's possible to change
the gene expression.
There are lots of
studies that support
this, that the genes are
mutable, that they're pliable
and not necessarily just the
fixed state you were born in.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We say that the
human form of you
is expressed to its maximum.
You end up in your full
physical form by the time
you're about 18 or 19.
Think about that.
The amount of energy
that has to be expressed
through all those genes to
create your physical body
is infinite.
It requires the energy
of the universe.
of life force itself
to be able to form that way.
Most people are born
without too many "defects,"
we would call them.
For the total
amount of genes you
have to have
something not formed
properly is actually
kind of rare.
And now we have a human
form, but guess what?
It has to function.
So functionality requires form.
We function really well unless
some of those template forms,
genes, are damaged,
are weak, and then we
start having problems.
So up till about 19
years old, you really
don't have any problems.
You're still being
created, but after 19,
it's all energetic function--
maintenance of the
form of the human body.
Those functions become
interesting because they're
operating programs.
They're like a CPU
in the human body.
They're related to the
brain as the hardware,
and they're related to your
mind as the software that
runs all this.
What's interesting to
me is that software
precedes the human form.
You are born with a personality.
It did not come about
in your physical form.
It came about through
your physical form, which
indicates it was pre-existing.
Your personality
drives your functions.
So some people are energetic,
some people or more dormant.
We express ourselves
across an incredible range
of experience and actions.
So human form and
function become something
that we notice.
We notice that things
change in our body
and in our ability to function
and the ability of those organs
to function.
But all of them can be addressed
and either improved or changed
through energetic work.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Our body and its functions
are supported by energy flow.
All illnesses are
supported by energy flow.
Your immune responses
are energized or not.
The autonomous and
semi-autonomic nervous systems
also operate on energy, whether
you are conscious of it or not.
Zero reality, the
reality of thought,
and imagination, and
creative expression
takes energy from your system.
Working our physical
movement actually
becomes important because
the more you move,
the more you can take on
in number one reality.
The more energy you
have, the more energetic
you are in zero
reality interactions.
They go back and forth.
For instance, running
might seem to be depleting
of your physical
energy, but it actually
energizes your energetic field.
And this helps you
mentally process more.
We are encouraging someone
to move and explore movement
as a basis for mental health.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Movement creates energy
through breathing, very simple.
So let's get into rhythm.
When you breathe, the
cilia in your lungs
accumulate a static
electric charge--
sort of like rubbing
your feet on the carpet.
That charge is then
transferred to storage sites
in the form of dense
organs in the body.
So when you breathe consciously
to develop a charge,
you have more battery life.
This is reflected in
a larger energy field.
The goal of martial arts is to
become consciously interactive
with the human energy
field, and also
merge zero and one reality.
If we go back to
the principles I
teach, awareness, balance,
moment, movement, momentum,
and then your will.
So as you can see,
number four movement
is that which pushes us through
our problems and, in doing so,
creates momentum in our will.
Now we are at a point
to create reality.
So if you break this down,
you wake up in the morning,
you have awareness that you need
to balance both zero and one
reality, you seize the
moment to create movement,
and that drives
momentum to create
your free will,
which is the deciding
factor on your current reality.
Without movement, we
don't have momentum.
And without momentum, we
can't get to higher states
of health and consciousness.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The goal of all movement is to
create energy to be ourselves.
We are scaling up
an energy flow,
and that allows us to do more,
learn more, and grow more.
Movement itself is generally
considered an art form.
We have all manner of
expressions of it--
in the form of sports,
in the form of arts,
from dance to
gymnastics, that movement
is something we relate to.
It's something
we're fascinated by.
The problem is, most
people are fascinated
by the movement of other
people and our own movement,
particularly after 19
years old, as something
we do less and less.
Some people carry on their form
of movement, their art form,
into their 20s or 30s.
40s, and 50s, we become
a little less motivated.
Why is that true?
Internal conflicts and
internal dialogues.
I love the dialogues.
Should I stay or should I go?
The dialogue is
usually an argument.
It represents being stuck.
Anxiety and
depression are a form
of being stuck, being
frozen in our consciousness.
The internal conflict
is one of choices.
Every time you get into
an internal conflict,
should I wear this, should I
wear that, should I go here,
should I order this at the
restaurant, you're losing time.
And we can get lost in that to
the point we've become frozen.
We don't move.
We can even get to a point where
we don't even want to engage,
and we become locked in
not just our own mind,
we become locked
in our own reality.
And that reality
obviously can be
one of a negative,
which is depression,
or anxiety, or guilt, or shame.
But in the same way, we
can make quick choices
that allow us to move.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Movement occurs before
you actually move.
You have become very
exceptional at moving your body
without thought.
But actually, the movement had
thought prior to the movement.
It had electron flow
prior to the thought.
It had some information
and energy flow before all
that happened.
There have been
scientific studies
that show the distance
between a thought and action.
It is actually one of the
primary forms of advancement
in martial arts--
to get to a point to where your
thoughts and actions happen
at the same time.
And then, at the
really advanced form,
your actions occur
before you even
think of them, where
you're actually acting way
ahead of your current reality.
You're way ahead of the
environment you're in.
We have that ability.
We have the ability to move
our mind ahead in time.
We usually teach about three
seconds is pretty normal.
People can actually move ahead
and project movement forward.
That is momentum.
You can develop through
certain martial arts,
through certain
meditative techniques,
to be able to see
yourself forward.
That's what we call it.
You can see yourself forward in
time and also in the movements
you need to make.
It is a pretty high
state of momentum,
because you have already
made all the choices.
If you create that momentum
and have that ability
to be ahead of yourself just
a little bit, what you find
is life doesn't have
as many conflicts.
It doesn't require of
you so many choices,
where you get choice burnout.
So choice burnout comes
at the end of the day.
I've already made all my
decisions and somebody goes,
you want to go eat?
Where do you want to go?
Oh my gosh, I can't
be picking something.
Why?
Because you just can't
make another choice.
What that means is you've lost
all momentum in your life.
And it shows, either as
we don't have a choice,
or we don't want
to make a choice,
because we have
expended all energy.
So one of the things
I teach is that when
you have a moment
between 3:00 and 5:00,
5:300 in the
afternoon or evening,
is to do some breathing
to increase your energy,
and also to recharge your
batteries to the point
you can go back into a
decision-making mode.
So decision making, which
is a thought process,
takes a lot of energy.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So ideally, in life, you
would get to some point
to where you don't do
internal conflicts.
You would know that you want
to go to a certain restaurant
or that you like
a certain person,
rather than throw it into a
duality, where you can't really
decide which way or the other.
That is limbo land.
That is where you burn off
the greatest amount of energy
that you have.
A lot of people
think that you burn
of all your energy in
movement during the day
and you become tired.
No, you burn it off
with your brain.
Your brain consumes all this
glucose, and water, oxygen--
all manner of things
in order to function.
And your mind is pushing
information and energy
through your brain
and into your body.
And if there are conflicts,
everything gets backed up.
Everything becomes
blocked, not knowing
that to take a moment
to actually increase
the amount of energy
in our body itself
and then to sort
through our awareness
would allow us to get
through these blocks.
They would allow us to
make better decisions
and, in the process, develop
a better way of living.
Now that I have shown you how
to break your current reality
using movement and also
how to create an awareness
through feedback, what's next?
How about imagination
and dimensions.
To understand this, we
must understand that we
are multi-dimensional beings.
Stay tuned for the
next episode, as we
explore transdimensional
interactions
and what that means for
you and your reality.